JLC Culture of Manhood Blueprint

What does that mean? 
JLC is an organization with spiritual leadership. This endeavor is under the leadership of Journey Life Church. 
Culture is both the structural and organic expression of values. When values are declared, culture facilitates their experience at every internal and external interface. Whatever ‘manhood’ is declared to be, culture is the manifestation of those words that brings them to life. 
Manhood is the description and declaration of the implicit identity of men by the Lord.  
A Blueprint is an outline of what is being built. It describes both the outcome as well as the materials to make it happen. There are details and procedures that aren’t explicitly declared in the blueprint, but when you give the blueprint, drawn by architects, to the right general contractors, engineers, and craftsmen, it comes to life. 

The most well understood component of this is the JLC leadership. JLC is a community under authority, served by men and women called to equip the saints. Our name is ‘church’ and we are part of the greater Church. Because this is something fairly well-defined for all of us, it won’t be emphasized in this document. 

Culture is something we’ve all experienced, but is far less understood, especially how to intentionally develop or influence it. Elements of cultivating culture and outlining the Blueprint will be the focus of this document.  

Manhood
How does God describe a man? How does he imbue him with responsibility? 
How does the Bible lead us in understanding this?
What does it mean to be a man at Journey Life Church? 

Attempting to perfectly and concisely describe manhood in a single sentence, or a list, or any finite permutation of words is hard. But here we are. I’d like to propose a starting point, and develop a space where we can be continually exploring and uncovering manhood in a way that invites us to continue encountering the Lord and experiencing His goodness. 

A man is the Father’s compassionate design, His crafted vessel, for the world to experience His goodness.

Being a man, means we are called to know the Father in a way that we become an expression of Him. A culture of manhood develops men who are an expression of the Father in every facet of their life - personally, in their marriages, with their kids, in community, in leadership, in service, in every area of influence. 

Blue Print Part 1: Level of intimacy ⇔ Levels of Invitation

We know that the Father’s invitation to us is unending without limitation. John 10:14 - 15 says as much -

“I am the good shepherd; I know my sheep and my sheep know me— just as the Father knows me and I know the Father.”

Combine that with the words of John 14, and you see clearly that Jesus has given us an open invitation to know Him, and therefore the Father, in the same way that He does - just as.

This level of intimacy is an invitation for all of humanity, but there are many levels, each of which requires an individual response that cannot be made for someone, but has to be made personally. 

Consider these different invitations we see in scripture - 
An invitation to the lost - Leaving the 99 to find the one
An invitation for all - the wedding banquet.
An invitation to serve - The 72 sent to do ministry
An invitation to follow, grow, and influence - The 12 disciples that became (11) apostles.
An invitation to be close - The 3 intimate friends of Jesus (Peter, John, James)

No church can fabricate these invitations, they are offered independent of the community that you are part of, but our community can model, guide, teach, encourage, equip, and mentor individuals to see and respond to their invitation. 

3 levels of invitation a culture of manhood supports
An Open Invitation
An Invitation to Intentionality
An Invitation to Intimacy

Furthermore, a culture of manhood develops invitations to the One, but that is the work of ministry we are equipping. It will be an overflow of the effectiveness of our work. 

The Open Invitation
The open invitation is a low barrier to entry, but sets the bar for intentionality, responsibility, and encounter. It is
Open to all men who are curious, newly born, or seeking the Lord
Consistent - making space often for people to connect and go deeper
Compassionate - uncompromising truth wrapped completely in the fruit of the spirit
Purposeful - There is a clear and obvious direction for people to take. This is not an endpoint, but a starting point - People come here to connect deeper.

Many serve in this environment. It is not a one person show, or even a small team, but a large team of men who support consistency, purpose, and compassion. It is hands on for everyone - nobody is an attender only - you come to engage and be engaged. 
The open invitation is a space where we declare openly the values of manhood and celebrate those who model them. We share struggles and victories and give people a taste of faithfully living in connection with the Father, responding to His leading, walking through trials joyfully and wholeheartedly, and receiving the rewards of our work. It’s not about pancakes, though we can eat if we want. It’s not about being manly and throwing axes or working out, though we can do those things too. It’s about celebrating and modeling biblical manhood in every facet of our lives. 
Remaining in the hands of Jesus, like a child, though we represent His strength on the earth
Continuous pursuit of our spouses, a deep adoration that models Jesus’ love of us, a joyful responsibility to steward the gift of cultivating one of God’s creation.
Humble, prayerful, & creative fathering and parenting. Raising our children an environment of encounter and accountability. 
Excellence in our personal lives. Not ego nor perfection, but a humble pursuit of wholeness and wellness that we refuse to idolize, or trivialize. 
Stewardship, excellence, leadership, and creative heaven-sent innovation in our professional expression
Responsibility and service in our community.


Invitations to Intentionality 
The Church is God’s people together experiencing and becoming an expression of His goodness and kindness. In every permutation of quantity and intimacy, we are invited to encounter the Lord and represent His heart. 

A culture of manhood takes ownership of each of these spaces and finds potent and powerful expressions in each. One man is unlikely to find himself in every one, but every man will have multiple spaces where he is growing, serving, and leading. 

Listed by quantity, which is easy to measure, then intimacy. Healthy intimacy is loosely described as a function of consistency (meeting frequency), identity (knowing each other), and vulnerability (sharing authentically). 
1:1
Marriage (most intimate)
Discipleship / Partnership
Brotherhood
Friendship
Kindness in community
Intimate & intentional groups (3 to 5-ish people)
Family
Boat Crews* (not a widely understood naming convention)
Teams
Groups joining to form community (6 - 15 people)
Neighbors
Small Groups
Connected Communities 
Neighborhoods
Shared Interests Groups
Men’s / Women’s / professionals / etc. 

The local churches we attend form a leadership and authority structure that support the healthy development of our more intimate communities. They give us space to connect, learn together, worship together, and share resources to connect communities to larger missions.  But in the end, we are responsible for developing these relationships in our own lives. A culture of manhood has men fighting for these relationships for himself, for his spouse, and teaching his children to build healthy connections as well. 

From the open invitation, men invite each other into intentionality. The most prevalent invitation will be 1:1 connections that include invitation into smaller groups with more focus and may include spouses or family. Trying to define these things prematurely will short circuit the culture. We need a structure that facilitates people having ideas to connect and brings them into healthy levels of responsibility and community. We need a baseline of standards, and then to allow communities to form.

An preliminary set of standards: 
Never solo. If you want to build an intentional community, it is good to have a team initiating. 
Clear invitations are healthy. Many communities form organically, but they can more easily dissolve under pressure. Depending on the level of intimacy expected, a level of clarity is necessary. 
Having oversight is best. It’s really healthy to have someone praying for and helping guide communities that are not explicitly a part of the community. 
You don’t have to be afraid of someone whose role is to be more facilitative, administrative, or more ‘in control.’ When done well, that is a gift to the group, but that is often the person who should be connected to the oversight. 
Titles are cheap. Leadership is essential. Communities thrive when there is a culture of leadership - everyone expecting to serve and grow, rather than building on one “leader.”  

Invitations to Intimacy
As men respond to the open invitation, and invitations to intentionality, we need to take it one step further and invite men into intimacy. These are the smallest, most tight-knit relationships. A culture of manhood creates relationships where individual training, coaching, and discipleship can take place between men. Some of these may form from the open invitation. Some of them from the intentional groups that form. Either way, we will have a community of men who 

Mentor and are mentored
Have a “swim-buddy” for hard times, or big wins, or vulnerable moments
Raise up the next generation and are humbly learning from the youth



Recap - 3 Levels of Invitation
Open - A JLC overseen, but men of God facilitated invitations to men everywhere to encounter Jesus.
Intentional - Leader overseen, but men of God initiated invitation for people to connect intentionally.
Intimate - Leader overseen, but individually initiated invitation for people to connect deeply.

A culture of manhood brings people into intimacy with Jesus. As he invited us in different ways, we have different pathways for every man to find themselves closer in community, and ultimately encouraged and guided to be closer with the Father. 

But wait? Isn’t this what everyone wants and everyone is trying to do? You haven’t said anything new.

Yes, but let’s not forget what we learned from Moneyball. Everyone was trying to win baseball games when Billy Beane figured out that it didn’t matter what someone’s batting average was if they knew how to get on base. Also, nothing new is under the sun, the more we align to executing foundational elements of scripture more effectively and not some hype idea, the better.

Nothing we are talking about is brand new, but we are emphasizing certain things and de-emphasizing others. The different elements we choose to emphasize are what build the trellis of culture. The same materials that build a beautiful trellis that facilitates year over year growth, can also be used to create a roof and eventually a cage that prohibit sunlight and limit growth. The untrained eye may see the same cage, but time shows what will grow. 

One of the main things we are doing is observing growth, not forcing it. We take one or two steps at a time, not advertising an outcome, but guiding the step faithfully, and we let God do the work with the trellis we put in place. This culture trellis will be described through boundaries (i.e. not taking shortcuts, not rushing, points of emphasis). For example, in general, the culture of manhood has oversight and leadership from JLC, but is not facilitated by JLC staff explicitly. One of the most difficult aspects of culture for organizational leaders is realizing that they cannot control culture, but have to let it grow and tend it carefully.   

Now What?
We’ve described a culture, but we haven’t talked about how to get there. I think there are three interesting perspectives of culture we can use to describe how we get there. 

Culture can be seen by what we celebrate and what we accept.
Culture is created in part by the stories we tell and retell as well as the ones we listen and re-listen to. 
Culture is what happens between declaring our core values and having others experience them.

If we want to see a culture of manhood, we need to
Celebrate true manhood, accept individual efforts and journeys, not tolerate the counterfeit.
Tell and listen to stories about manhood. 
Declare the values of manhood and observe and recreate the experience of them.

We believe that one of the ways this is done biblically is through the roles of elders and deacons. With scripture as our foundation, we believe there are opportunities for us to recognize how the Kingdom celebrates leadership in communities based on these foundational roles. 

An example of this might look like: 
Commissioning traditional “Elders” as described by scripture with specific
Personal lives that have been vetted to represent scripture
Targeting older men of faith
A declared responsibility to serve JLC and the community of men
Emerging Gents (Emer-gents)
Those who are desiring to become elders, but for a reason or another (age, time in the faith, etc.) have not reached the standard. 
Targeting mid-age men (25 - 40? 30 - 45?), but also for older men who have been recently saved or re-connected to the Lord. 
These men have declared their commitment to personal standards and serving JLC and the community of men. 
Next-Gen (18 - 25/30)
Men who have committed standards that set them up to be current leaders to their peers.

As you’ll see in the timeline section, this is not well-defined for a reason. This is one of the more important foundations to build on and the development of these standards should be well-considered and vetted. By rigorously defining these concepts, we are celebrating manhood, and not accepting counterfeit, we are choosing what stories we want to emphasize and re-tell. We are declaring the values that we want others to experience within and around us. 

The importance of building this structure is that the invitations to intimacy need to be stewarded and led by many men if we are able to operate with any level of consistency. A staff of 5, or even 10 would not be able to effectively steward a culture of any material size while upholding the other responsibilities of leading a community. This is where the saints need to be equipped to do the actual ministry. 

With these roles articulated and leaders identified, vetted, given responsibility and authority, we have the foundation for developing a consistent and purposeful open invitation. If part of the responsibility of these leadership roles is to steward the culture - the expression of the expressed values of manhood - then we have accountability to intentional and intimate relationships forming. Every man who is a leader at JLC (at whichever role) will have agreed to their own personal commitments to serving the expression of these values - by building relationships and communities within and around JLC. 

This might look like individual mentorship, or being part of a Boat-Crew, or overseeing a small group, or whatever ideas we define as options for service. 
Timeline
Not rushing is so important. 

Culture is not built at the pace of business, it is built at the pace of community. It needs to be both intentional and organic. It needs to be structured as well as free-flowing. There is an art to it, like pruning, which allows for the fruitful to remain, the fruitless to be removed, and even the less-fruitful to be pruned for more fruit. 

A rough timeline might look something like this
Leadership Initiation (2 - 3 months)
Define the leadership levels, qualification process, high level commitments, and accountability for each. 
Observe, build, and pray over the invitation list. 
Invite and go through the process with a limited set. 
With this bigger, but still small group (2 - 3 months) - 
Review the levels, qualifications, responsibilities, and accountability structure. 
What did we miss? Who did we miss? 
Update and invite the next round (this should likely be the last initial invite round depending on the method we choose)
This could start with the most Elder positions and then move to the Emer-gents, etc. 
Initiate the foundations (2 - 3 months)- 
Articulate the values of manhood we want to see 
Review the current man-ventory as best we can. 
Giving the leaders time to grow into their responsibilities, what would it look like 6 - 12 months from now?
At the same time, build out a 12 - 24 month plan for the “open invitation” 
Consistent - You can put it in the calendar
Well-supported - not reliant on one, two, or too few people of any count. 
Purposeful - There is teaching on manhood. Everyone participates. There is room for Holy Spirit. 
Is God laying intentional invitations on anyone’s heart for specific things? Start outlining and praying with other leaders. 
Launch the open invitations
Make a promise and keep it. We are going to be around and doing this. You can put it in your calendar. 
It’s okay for this to come from the stage. We want to support this. 
Observe, Celebrate, and Create
Maintain the structured accountability for each level of leadership (Elders, etc.
Observe the man-things that are happening 
Celebrate men and manhood on stage weekly for a season. 

 
