Standards Review - Andrew

The Assignment	2
Intimacy	3
Reflections on Intimacy	4
Identity	7
Reflections on Identity	8
Integrity	11
Reflections on Integrity	13
Leadership	16
My Wife	17
My Children	18
My Work	19
My Community	20
Reflections on Leadership	22
Fruitfulness	26
Reflections on Fruitfulness	28
Trials	29
Reflections on Trials	30
Inheritance	31
Reflections on Inheritance	32


The Assignment 
For each standard, consider and write out - 
What does this look like for you personally? 
What are the different “levels” of maturity you’ve experienced or seen? 
How does a 20 year old do this well? What is next for you? 
Is there someone at JLC that inspires you in this area? Someone anywhere else? 
What are some real questions you’ve asked relating to this? What are some hard questions you’ve neglected to ask, but wish you would have? 
What scripture embodies this idea well? 
Speak about your journey as much as you want.

Philosophy
I ended up starting with a personal standards review that I did for Boat Crew and then adding the additional reflections that are useful for what we are building with 5i’s. 
Standards
Intimacy - What does your connection with God look like? How do you remain / abide?
How do you ‘breathe' with God? 
How do you ‘eat?’
What routines / structures anchor you? 
Identity - Who does God say you are? 
Individual words, bible verses? 
Ideas / concepts / phrases that you’ve heard the Lord speak over you.
Prophetic words from others.
Integrity - Living without compromise
Where has remaining faithful or uncompromising cost you? 
How does the world invite you to a compromise, a shortcut, that you recognize. 
Leadership - How are you investing in, learning from, and leading in these areas? 
Marriage
Children
Work
Community
Fruitfulness —> What fruit that you bare will last? What is the legacy of your efforts? 
What are you doing that really matters? 
That must be and will last. 
Inheritance —> Heaven on earth
What promises of God do you believe God is preparing you to receive? 

Intimacy
Intimacy with the Lord continues to be the foundation of my life. I lived many years as what I would call “a foolish virgin” where I knew enough to be close to wise virgins, was aware of the Lord’s return, but did not have the intimacy (the oil) for my lamp to be lit in the time of his coming. Seeing the cost of that, and hearing the Lord’s merciful and gracious invitation to me to restore intimacy, “Andy, will you give me 5 am again?” has forever marked my life. 

Intimacy, to me, is being with someone enough to see them, and sharing myself enough to be seen. While there are many ingredients to this in my life, the primary one continues to be dedicated time every day where it is just the Lord and myself without distraction - this is most often first thing in the morning. 

Personally
I have a consistent morning routine that is like eating a spiritual meal. I fill it with things I genuinely believe I need every day to be healthy, fit, and strong.
Reading the Word
Listening for God’s voice
Encouraging and strengthening myself with what I read and hear
There are aspects of my relationship that are like breathing. I want them to be a natural reflex, but also something I am continually mindful of in my relationship with the Lord.
Mindful of his presence throughout my day, especially through decisions to be thankful, joyful, and prayerful.
Tuning myself to be aware of His presence.
There are aspects of my relationship that are like water or wine - they refresh me and give me courage beyond what is normal. I need water daily, and while the analogy breaks down for wine, I think we need this regularly in the spirit :). 
I experience this most often in community, but I feel like I am learning to do this in worship as well. 
My family is a strong source of refreshment and encouragement. 

I find consistency, discipline, community, and finding additional sources of teaching to be essential for the health and fitness of my life. In addition to attending Journey, over the last year or two, bethel teaching and the passion translation emails have been influential and encouraging in my life.

I have a tattoo on my side that says “Just as” and references John 10:14 - 15. It is a reminder that Jesus said we can know him JUST AS He knows the Father.
Reflections on Intimacy

Levels of maturity in intimacy
There isn’t a standard of intimacy, but there is maturity. As someone who gives their life to Jesus and responds to His invitation to know Him, like any relationship, there will be a progression of growth. A lack of growth is a form of immaturity. However, strictly prescribing growth milestones would be religious and controlling. Like every marriage or friendship, the progression is unique to the relationship, but there are general trends that are commonly experienced. Normalizing language, encouragement, and accountability helps facilitate growth in community. 
There is a general pattern I tend to recognize in developing maturity in any area - 
Awareness - “This exists.”
Desire - “I want this.”
Priority - “I need this more than other things.”
Consistency & Discipline - “I will place this correctly in my life at cost.”
Integration - “This is an integrated part of my expression.”
On ‘religion’ - Avoiding religious mentalities has value, but we need to recognize that being consistent and disciplined is not the same as ‘religious.’ Good things should be done consistently and with discipline - avoiding sleep, food, or water, to not be ‘religious’ would be ridiculous and I think avoiding practices that develop intimacy is much worse. One way to properly separate ‘religion’ from consistency and discipline is to see that the spirit of religion isn’t about what you do, but why you do it. Religion tells us we need to do things to be ‘enough’ whereas consistency and discipline says we do things because of who we are and their value to us. A healthy lifestyle of intimacy involves consistency (routine, etc.), discipline (rightly placed actions), creativity (trying new things), and spontaneity (unexpected).
Someone mature has been through different seasons experiencing God’s invitation
Wilderness training: “I have no food, God.”
Tuning: “I can’t hear” → “I hear you better now!”
Testing / Trial: “I don’t understand” → “I trust you anyway.”


Talking about intimacy
What is language we can use to express our connection 
Breathing: I need God continually to live → Remaining present.
God breathed into Adam.
Jesus breathed Holy Spirit into His disciples.
Food: I need daily nourishment to be strong and function properly. 
My food is to do the will of Him who sent me. 
Man does not live on bread alone, but by every word of God.
Teaching (milk vs. solid food)
Water or wine - Life & Refreshment  
Never thirst
Tree planted by streams of living water
Proximity
Enoch was ‘with God’
Moses spoke ‘mouth to mouth’ with God
“I and the Father are one.” - Jesus
“Follow me.” - Jesus

Inspirational people @ JLC & elsewhere 

I wish I knew this more about people. It gives my heart joy to hear people have disciplined personal intimacy with God. I try to ask about it from time to time, but I feel like there is a wound I want to be careful not to open. I also feel like people make excuses about not fighting for intimacy with the Lord.
I am inspired by people who are consistent even when circumstances are challenging.
I am inspired by people who are consistent over many seasons of life.
I am inspired by people who are consistent when life is chaotic. 
I am inspired by young adults taking ownership of their faith even though they don’t have as much going on.
I am inspired by people who are disciplined when things are going really well. 


Courageous Questions

When we build a culture of intimacy, how do we sharpen each other? What level of trust is needed between people to support these kinds of questions? 

We have to start by building a foundation of trust - love infused compassion for one another. Compassion where we don’t compromise the truth, but we meet people where they are with kindness and gentleness to help them take steps forward. 
We have to normalize healthy / disciplined personal intimacy. We often normalize the struggle with sin but fail to normalize victory. Sin is a guarantee to humanity - victory is a promise to believers. 
Asking both curiously and directly about personal connection and the consistency / discipline / creativity and spontaneity that supports it.
I often like to ask people, “when was the last time God interrupted your… ?” 
Truthfully, I think it is rare for God to interrupt someone who doesn’t have a consistent and disciplined personal intimacy first. It’s not that He isn’t talking, but you can’t be tuned to what you never listen to. 
Asking about connection before giving advice. 
When someone brings a trial, their actions are often not as important as their posture and the reason for their actions. David and Saul both broke the ‘law,’ but David eating the showbread was an example Jesus used. His heart was for the Lord where Saul’s heart was anxious and fearful in not waiting for Samuel and sacrificing before a battle. 
Requiring discipline & accountability for leadership.
It’s hard to lead where we haven’t been or aren’t willing to go. 

Scripture Alignment
John 10:14&15 - We are invited to live just as close to Jesus as He is to the Father. 
John 15 - “Abide in me.”
Moses - face to face. 
David - especially his psalms

Identity
Identity grows from the soil of intimacy. When I spend time close to the Lord, I am allowing Him to see me, but more importantly, I am allowing Him to speak new life over me. While I think I know who I am, I have a bastardized view of myself that the Lord is continually redeeming and restoring. I was born in brokenness and the Lord has invited me to wholeness. While sharing with him what is real to me, The Lord is able to speak what is true, turning my pain to ashes, and from my ashes calling forth beauty.

I have a document of identity statements that I have built up over the years, a few of them will show up in other places in this document, but here is a summary -  
As a son, I belong.
I am a living Sacrifice.
I am a compassionate & committed Husband; I am hers and she is mine.
I am a brilliant and creative father; my children will go beyond me. 
In my family, I build towards our legacy.
I am a warrior on a team of warriors leading warriors.
I am a leader that will follow you.
I am an expression of the Father - a conductor of His song on the earth.
I honor what Jesus has declared in every person.
I am in awe of every testimony of Jesus

The world will define me if I let it, but I will not. I was created, and then invited, to hear what the Lord has to say over me. I often wonder what it means to hear the Lord speak to our identity. Am I hearing the echoes of Jesus’s declaration at the beginning of creation? Am I hearing what He was speaking when He knit me together in my mother’s womb? Am I hearing Him speak new life to me in these moments? 

The glory in hearing my identity from the Lord is when I live from it. Specifically, when I live courageously aligned to who He says I am, and not bending to the whims of circumstance. 

Reflections on Identity

About Me 
The idea of identity started swirling around me in 2014 / 2015 when Mackenzie joined The Warrior Class (TWC). TWC was an expression of Graham Cooke’s teaching and philosophies on discipleship and some of that included identity. I didn’t give it much thought until I started exploring and personally writing identity statements sometime in 2018 / 2019. In doing so, I feel like I stumbled into a life mission - to restore identity to people and communities while building culture to support people living from identity rather than circumstance. 

Over the last 5 years, the Lord has used the concept of identity to shape me. It is not uncommon for me to recognize a character flaw - a space where I am consistently immature or do not reflect the goodness or kindness of God - and then ask the Lord, “Who am I in this space?” The words I hear in those moments shape the journey of me being transformed as I let them renew my mind.

In 2021 I wrote a coaching framework to teach identity (hearing the Lord speak to you) and discipline (rightly placed actions). I’ve walked through it with roughly 40 people and I still believe in it strongly. It’s not for the faint of heart. 
 
Maturity
I have the same general philosophy for maturity here that I did in intimacy 
Awareness → Desire → Priority → Consistency & Discipline → Integration 

And similar to intimacy, there is a significant language barrier in identity and a misunderstanding of purpose. 

As for developing language - my current favorite analogy for this is lego blocks. The size of the lego block is directly related to the level of detail and precision that you can build a structure. There are 6 inch mega blocks that are pretty much only good for walls or towers. While the more traditional legos, and even smaller, are capable of building exceptionally detailed replica’s of iconic popular culture structures.


Example
Being a “child of God” or “son of God” is a common expression of identity in the church. I would say it is like a Lego Mega Block. 
Biblically, there are four different Greek words translated to ‘son’ or ‘child’ when relating to God. Starting from describing a helpless infant and progressing to a man with the same authority in his words as his father. 
This is just one perspective of identity (my coaching journal had 8) that enriches our understanding of who we are in relationship to the Father. 

Words are worthless unless we are renewed and transformed by them. Identity isn’t meant to be quoted in convenience, it’s meant to be lived regardless of circumstance. I will mention this further in the integrity section, but the core conviction is learning to live from identity rather than circumstance. 

Levels of maturity
I expect young believers to be building awareness and language for identity. 
I expect growing believers to be walking through trials and testing that is forging their identity. 
I expect older believers to be unwavering in any circumstance - Character = forged identity. Romans 5: 3-5

Inspirational & Influential Peoples
Identity is full contact. When you start taking ownership of your identity, the enemy is trying to steal, kill, and destroy, and the Lord is wanting to forge in your character. The enemy plays right into His hands 😀. People on their journey are inspiring, namely - 

Mackenzie inspires me. She didn’t realize the impact it would have, but when she signed up for The Warrior Class, she was laying new foundations in our marriage and our family. It tested us, and she stood firm. In many ways, we are where we are because of her courage to stand on what the Lord spoke to her in tremendous trial. 
Ben Friedkin came back from a retreat in Colorado and read an identity statement with epic background music outside of Blue Owl. I can’t remember the sequence of events exactly, but I know he was a big part of my first pass at hearing the Lord speak to me. 
The people who have wholeheartedly walked through the Foundations Journal with me are a continuous encouragement to me. They are a testament to God’s faithfulness as He continues to meet them in blessing and in trials. 
Anyone who begins taking ownership of who they are in God is inspiring to me. While being the most natural thing we can do, it is never without test, trial and a need for courage to move from exciting encounter to forged character. 

Scripture
Right now I am just spit balling a few scriptures. I think I have something more thought out somewhere, but these are the 3 categories I typically think of when I think of how scripture supports and teaches the concept of identity. 

Scripture that describes how we were created by Jesus
John 1 - Through him all things were made; without him nothing was made that has been made.
Psalm 139 - For you created my inmost being you knit me together in my mother’s womb.
[and more…] 

Scripture that describes different identity concepts 
Relational verses - God as Father, Jesus as Bridegroom, King, Friend, etc. 
Personal identity concepts 
Love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength
Guard your heart, for out of it flows all things.
You are transformed by the renewing of your mind.

Scripture that describes the training of and impact of identity
Romans 5:3 - 5
His Word will not come back void (we are an expression of His Word - John 1)

Courageous Living
There are 2 concepts here that I want to see courageously expressed in our community - though they require a firm foundation in intimacy or else they are worthless. The first is building the language of identity and not settling for Lego Mega Block versions of who we are. As we build language, the second concept arises, leading and training with identity. We won’t settle for generic advice as we know both who we are, and who we are talking to, and know that many of life’s more dynamic and impactful circumstances are invitations to live more courageously from our identity. 

Integrity
I believe there are (at least) 3 types of integrity, and my conviction is to live by all three, however heavily prioritizing the second two if there ever was a misalignment. 
“Moral” integrity
Biblical integrity
Integrity to your identity

Moral integrity is a societal construct. The word ‘moral’ isn’t in scripture, though we recognize the Bible’s impact on morality. 

However, just doing the right thing by society's standards was turned on its head when Jesus set the vision higher than what was understood from the law and ten commandments, outlining what I’m calling, “Biblical morality,” or biblical integrity. 
Don’t murder, but even more so, guard your words and actions to prevent giving life to anger. 
Don’t commit adultery, but even more so, guard your heart and mind against thoughts that would lead down that path. 
Don’t steal, but even more so, protect those that work for you and look out for those who don’t have enough - when you see a need meet it. 

How do we hold ourselves accountable to biblical morality? It is clearly not enough to look at someone’s life and see if they have avoided catastrophic events. But perhaps in community we can be mindful and courageous to initiate these types of conversations, allowing people to share struggles, while not not settling for a life of compromise or partnering with shame and accusation. Everyone gets angry, but we have been given no shortage of tools to develop character, even in areas of deep wounding, if we are willing to be humble.

Beyond what I would consider general biblical integrity is integrity to identity. Meaning - am I responding to and honoring the unique invitations from the Lord to live from who He says I am.  

Throughout scripture, God’s people are put in situations of divine discomfort. Sometimes it is more self-imposed than others, but even Jesus was led into the desert to be tested. Do I partner with the Lord, or run from who He has called me to be. 


My conviction is to hold moral integrity until it is misaligned with biblical integrity and to continuously seek to live out integrity to my identity as the Lord gives me wisdom and grace to do so. 

Examples
The world is wrestling with an identity crisis on gender and sexuality.
I have no right to control another person, but I have no obligation to normalize their sin. I will not accept this attempt to create a new normal. 
I have not been called to shame, accuse, or publicly call out individuals for their failures in this, though I would be responsible for compassionately walking with someone towards freedom who put their trust in me. 
In general, I hold a strong conviction to not normalize cultural deviations from God’s heart, while refusing to partner with the enemy as an accuser towards people who are. 
When it comes to financial resources, I have felt personal convictions about how and where I spend money. This often costs me something every month as I strive to purchase items where I can say - “I like what they are making and how they are making it.”
In business, I have stayed in uncomfortable situations because I feel the Lord speaking to my identity. I have also not pursued specific opportunities because they don’t align with my convictions on biblical integrity.

Along with this, I have core values that I am mindful no matter that situation - 
His glory - I do not live this life for my will to be done or to build my kingdom, but to align fully to the glory of Jesus, to be fully submitted to Him. I believe the core values below model that conviction. 
People - I will not compromise a person for my vision. I hope that my life leads people to meaningful sacrifice and worthwhile suffering, but I believe those are not related to a life of compromise. 
Virtue - My values are not lived because of convenience, I live aligned no matter the cost.
Integrity - You see the same me at every distance and from every angle although the intensity varies with intimacy. 
Compassion - I walk with others from where they are toward truth. I do not shout from my righteous tower, or enable someone to live a life of compromise. 
Adventure - I choose to build character through adventure.


Reflections on Integrity
Growing in Maturity
I have the same general philosophy for maturity
Awareness → Desire → Priority → Consistency & Discipline → Integration 
With the added caveat of how we move from social integrity (basic morality) to biblical integrity to character (identity integrity).

To me, the struggle in many people’s faith walk is a misunderstanding of God’s intention to bring people into integrity to their identity - character. Salvation is a starting point not a finish line, and the end result is not that you look like ‘Jesus’ as he walked the earth, but that you become the true expression of yourself - the one he declared at the earth’s foundation and knit together when it was time.

The invitation to character is saturated in scripture, but often glossed over from pulpits. For whatever reason, it can feel like we prioritize filling the lobby rather than equipping the saints to be sent. 

My main point in much of this is that maturity in integrity is rarely preached beyond general morality or biblical morality, when I think there is a much higher call that is not predicated on a supernatural calling to vocational ministry. We are all called to be transformed by our intimacy with the Lord, into your identity, and that identity is then forged to character where Holy Spirit cannot help but to bring heaven to earth because we have become a living walking expression of the very Word of God. This is why suffering → perseverance → character → hope (Romans 5) and why we consider trials “Pure Joy.” 

Our individual maturity in this will be greatly increased by a corporate maturity where we recognize the trials we face are invitations. Invitations to correction, or training, or to conquer the words of the enemy. (More on this in “Trials”) 


Inspiration
Whenever I see someone make courageous decisions, I am inspired. This often looks like someone who is in a difficult circumstance who makes a Kingdom decision at a cost. 

Scripture
I mention that scripture is saturated with the language and invitations to integrity to identity and really it’s the narrative of scripture from the beginning. Rather than write a book (within what is becoming a book), I’ll bullet point out a few major points of the narrative as I see it.

Adam and Eve were given one basic instruction, and the invited to learn and grow with the Father. I believe that the tree of knowledge was not a ‘never,’ but a not yet. A single command to trust the Lord. 
Israelites were given 10 commandments, and then an infrastructure for governing their society. They came from a pagan culture that worshiped both their king (Pharaoh) as well as many gods. The Lord invited them to build a society that functioned differently.
From Moses to Jesus we see a theme where those that are raised into integrity to their identity over time fare better than those thrust into positions of authority. 
Moses - 40 years training in palace, 40 years training with a priest
Joshua - Raised in the presence of God and under Moses
Saul - Thrust into authority
David - Called to be king, but trained for 17 years.
Solomon - Inherited his title without the struggle David had.
Jesus - 18 years from “I’m about my Father’s business.” to being baptized

I think the main point I want to convey is that integrity isn’t a buzzword or a byword to our journey, it is a central component of living from intimacy and identity. Many of our frustrations in faith come from misunderstanding the invitation from the Lord to forge our integrity. 


Courageous Questions
When I think about a culture that asks courageous questions regarding integrity, I think of a culture that must understand intimacy, identity, and build trust through consistency. In every sphere of life there are questions that can be asked regarding consistency, discipline, and righteousness. Everything from how we manage our personal time, how we prioritize family in a world that constantly tries to pull us away from connection, and the kind of decisions we make in work / business. 

One of the key distinctions I have come to understand over the years is the difference between sacrifice and compromise. Integrity is closely connected to understanding the difference. Sacrifice is often required to move forward in a meaningful direction - given something of value that you have the right to give. Compromise, on the other hand, is what I call giving something you have no right to give.


Leadership
As a man, I am called to lead. While there may be seasons I am leading from the front, it is easy to fantasize forms of leadership in our society that I don’t believe are healthy or effective. In its simplest form, I am called to care for, serve, support, and raise the people close to me up to be more complete expressions of themselves. I get to partner with Jesus to hear who they are becoming and take steps with them. The day to day of leadership is not glamorous, but full of intentional (purpose driven), disciplined (rightly placed), actions that compassionately love those around me. 

One of my identity statements is specifically related to leadership - 

I am a Leader that will follow you. 
As a leader, I look not only at where you are, but where you’ve been and where you are going. I seek to understand my role in proclaiming your destiny with you. I will not limit your expression with my vision, but will contribute to your becoming with all that I am. With honor, I will build reverently on the truth and excellence of those who went before me, and with humility, present all that I've fought for openly to my peers and the coming generation.
 

My Wife

As a husband, I am my beloved’s and she is mine.
I am a compassionate and committed husband. I give my individual life to the joyful, purposeful, and powerful expression of our union. I will see the greatest possible expression of my wife’s life on this earth and it will be to the Father's glory as well as my own. In my wife, I have found my helper, my partner, my friend through thick and thin. Together, the enemy shakes at our purpose and the earth celebrates our progress.

Over 14 years of marriage and 17 years being together, I have come up with many ways that don’t effectively lead or love my wife, but fortunately, I have found quite a few that do as well -

My wife loves gifts. While getting her the best gift is awesome, she really does love the thoughtfulness of gift giving as much as the gift itself. 
My wife loves acts of service. Again, the service itself is meaningful, but it really pushes things over the top when I am simply mindful of what she needs or what’s on her plate and I help her with it. I make an effort to impact her responsibilities at home whenever I am 
We go on dates once a month. We used to do this twice a month, but both our financial resources and child care resources have been impacted for a season. She loves going out to dinner. 
We check in on each other throughout the day through text and phone calls. She does a good job respecting my work boundaries, but I like to connect with her and see how she is doing. 
We make time to connect both relationally and on the household business regularly throughout the week (though not often the same conversation). Some seasons, these are given specific time slots. 
We lead our children together spiritually, academically, and as their mom and dad. 
We are mindful of each other’s desires with physical intimacy and actively work together to meet them.
I strive to be compassionate and kind with my words - believing in who she is and who she is becoming. 
I don’t ever try to punish my wife by ignoring her, though sometimes I ask for space. I don’t yell at my wife or call her names. I try not to be overly critical, though our relationship leaves room for us to correct one another, or voice our preferences. 
I am continually learning to be more disarmed around her. I’ve struggled most with being defensive in our marriage, but by God’s grace, that is an area of much growth. 

My Children 

As a Father, my children will go beyond me.
I am a brilliant and creative father. I am raising future world changers in an environment of freedom and love, disciplined by the grace of Jesus and the dreams and visions of Holy Spirit. In raising powerful humans, my children are being prepared each and every day to express themselves honestly and freely with healthy boundaries that promote a lifestyle of worship and adventure fueled by courage and integrity.

I have three children - though I believe there will be a fourth (Amelia) waiting for us in heaven. (Ages as for December 2023)
Evelyn, age 8
Olivia, age 7
Caleb, age 4

I believe in both parenting and fathering and understanding the difference between the two. As a parent, I am responsible for setting and holding boundaries for my children that allow them to express themselves extravagantly with the right amounts of safety and adventure. As a father, I am responsible for protection, provision, seeing the Lord’s invitation to my children, and leaving an inheritance. 

How I intentionally love my children
Every month (most months) for the last 2+ years, I have had an individual date with my children on the day (3rd, 16th, 20th) of their birth.
Every month for the last 4+ years, I write in a journal I have for each of them that I will give them when they are 18.
I pay attention and put effort into knowing them well. While I don’t have as much time with them as their mother, who is also their homeschool teacher, I take time to recognise their interests, preferences, personalities, etc. 
I treat our children differently. They each have different needs and I try to meet them with what they need rather than treating them all the same. 



My Work
As of December, 2023, I am a partner in Avodah Transformations with Nathan Bedford. Avodah isn’t yet well-defined from a day-to-day business operations perspective, but continues to take shape as Nate and I trust the Lord with direction and build with excellence each day. Generally, we do technical work building products or software solutions for people, however, I also do leadership coaching and culture development when opportunities arise. 

The core values of Avodah are an extension of my own (see Integrity section) with Avodah’s mission being to bring heaven to earth by developing uncompromising value propositions that allow our people to be an identity-driven expression of themselves in a Kingdom culture. That’s a lot of Christian buzzwords, so let me outline what that means. 

Bringing Heaven to Earth - Heaven is a place of the Father’s glory - meaning every inch of the atmosphere of heaven is under His authority. We bring heaven to earth when we submit our own areas of influence to the Lord. And in doing so, create a space for his goodness to express itself through kindness, compassion, genuine love, salvation, and even miracles, signs, and wonders. 

Developing Uncompromising Value Propositions - As a business, people pay for our services. It is essential that what people pay for is not compromising who we are or who the Lord is in any way. A simple way we have explained that to others is - we aren’t building software for casinos or vaping companies. There are obviously more restrictions than this, but this usually gives people an idea. 

Identity Driven - Identity driven people are people who know what the Lord says about them and are able to live it out. As a company, we not only want to encourage that, but also help people uncover their God-given identity. 

Kingdom Culture - Kingdom implies submission to King Jesus. Culture implies that submission to Jesus is represented in our core values and celebrated throughout our organization. 

Practically (finally) - this means that our work is of excellent quality, people thrive, and we are as able to speak to the Lord’s involvement in our growth as we are the numbers and projects that represent our growth. 

My Community
Engaging effectively in my community is an ongoing adventure. While impacting those you spend time with seems to be something every human aspires to, taking an intentional posture towards developing the community around you seems to be either something someone does by vocation, passion, or not at all. I have not naturally been someone who thought to pursue either passion or vocation for impacting the community, though as the years go by, I see both the responsibility and opportunity I have to do so and the consequence of avoiding it. 

Neighborhood
I grew up on a rural highway with 2.5 acres. While not the largest piece of land, it effectively prevented me from having neighborhood friends, and I noticed. I couldn’t believe kids lived near enough to other kids to go play - I wanted that. I live in a neighborhood and my kids do play with other kids. We have impactful relationships, and are continuing to learn to have greater impact. I have been struck by the instructions found in Exodus when the Lord was designing Passover - “If any household is too small for a whole lamb, they must share one with their nearest neighbor…” It’s subtle, but to me, it says a lot. Don’t go to your best friends. Don’t pass by 3, 4, or 5 streets to go to your favorite house or the people you align with most, go to your nearest neighbor. Proximity matters. I want to see transformation in my neighborhood. 

Local Church
I have been part of JLC since 2009. While much of that time I was disgruntled, I’ve been a part of different initiatives throughout my tenure. Over the last 5 years, the Lord has softened my heart, and from that place, given me grace and revelation to better appreciate, love, and eventually participate in my local church. I still see many of the same flaws, but I see them less as unbearable frustrations, and more as invitations for people to rise up and play their part. They are empty, human-sized, puzzle piece areas waiting for someone to respond to the Lord. Much of the way I impact and lead in the local church is in the area’s below. More than ever, I am regularly impacted by the teaching and the environment of our community at JLC. 

Boat Crew
Ah Boat Crew. I think a link to another document would be better than writing things out here. 


Mentorship
I formally mentor two young men in their 20’s, meeting weekly. I try to maintain a level of availability for young adults. My core philosophy in mentorship is to build trust and help teach / coach them in how to anchor their life more fully in Jesus. Similar to Boat Crew there are practicals to this - consistency, assignments, etc. At the same time, nothing is the same between different people that I mentor. I often find that, even though I am focused on the same thing all the time - intimacy with Jesus, and the outcomes that come from it - identity, integrity, leadership, fruitfulness, trial, and inheritance, every journey is unique and every conversation is different. 

I am not formally mentored by anyone and I don’t love that. I also don’t know what to do about it. I’ve worked to build meaningful peer relationships where people have consistent access to me through Boat Crew and other mechanisms, but I know that is different than having someone you trust more formally to speak into your life. As of 2024, I will be meeting with Jared regarding the men’s ministry at JLC monthly.   

Men’s Ministry
This is a new venture that is being formed as we speak. At some point, similar to Boat Crew, I think a more comprehensive review of this will be necessary. As of now, I have committed to helping Journey Life Church launch a men’s ministry focused on building a culture of manhood. 


Reflections on Leadership
Growing in Maturity
I have a lot of what I consider to be wisdom on leadership. At the same time, effective leadership is something I am continuing to develop in my life. I feel like the Lord gave me insight, and I continue to work toward living it out. My same general philosophy for developing maturity applies here as well - 

Awareness → Desire → Priority → Consistency & Discipline → Integration

I think here in leadership especially, it’s important to point out that this process is fueled by humility and courage - recognizing truth and owning it in our hearts. Without humility, there is no awareness of a better way; there is no desire to do differently. It requires humility to prioritize something new and it takes courage to develop consistency and discipline, and then eventually integrate and own a better way. 

The enemy loves to have us settle for half-truths and luke-warm implementation. We realize something is good, but leave it in desire with failed attempts at discipline and consistency accusing us and shaming our next efforts. It takes humility and courage to see something better. It takes humility and courage to develop it into character. The enemy loves the pride that keeps us from seeing the truth, and the shame that keeps us from becoming who we are. 

In my experience, leadership often starts for people with a personality or a level of success. This makes sense as people follow people they want to be like and that usually comes from some form of individual expression or external result. 

Without diving too deep and writing a book on leadership - personality and achievement have utility in leadership, but they are only tools. The essence of leadership that I think is missed is where we are leading from and where we are leading people towards. The key ingredients to maturity in leadership stem from identity and wisdom - they are further accented by practical skills and personal achievement (in alignment with identity, not worldly achievement). 

In this case, when I say identity, I mean understanding the importance of and the process that brings identity. Where you lead people will be towards where you’ve gone / where you are going. If you aren’t anchored in understanding the primary journey is hearing the Lord and becoming, you’ll try to lead people on the path that you experienced through circumstances. While helping people through circumstances can be valuable, it has no necessary connection to eternal value and what you developed in your trial may not be the desired result in someone else’s trial. Understanding the difference is half the battle, the other half is having the wisdom - God-given insight - to help people walk through their circumstance with an identity focused mindset rather than circumstance driven. 

Another key element of leadership to consider is that it does not require authority. To be effective in authority, you must be a good leader, but you do not need authority to be a great leader. It is likely that you being a good leader will lead to a level of authority, but it is not required. 

To summarize - mature leadership understands the practical skills of developing people in the midst of organizational goals (whether it be the family unit, or community, or work). However, mature leaders have their foundation in guiding people to hear the Lord and becoming in the midst of any circumstance.

Inspirational Peoples

I’m inspired by people who have the gift to ‘reset the room’ as I call it. There are certain people that I’ve witnessed that seem to break down whatever social classes exist and are able to rebuild with the people in the room. (Scott Crosby, Aaron Preston, Sam Adams)
The first person I saw who cared more about people than their job was EJ Perrault at Jackson. He wasn’t even a believer. 

On February 13th, 2023 - As I was reflecting on the original call to men from January, I felt this from the Lord and it directly applies to leadership - 

The lack of leadership you are experiencing in your cities and nations is because men are feeling ‘called’ from the spirits of ‘need’ and ‘ambition,’ but Heaven is not moved by need or ambition. Heaven flows from overflow, from glory to glory, from levels of obedience and authority that lead to increased levels of obedience and authority. 

When we take on the mission of prioritizing intimacy, identity, and integrity in the men of JLC, you will begin to experience the inheritance of leadership that I have not only for your community, but also for your city and state. JLC will overflow with leadership and anointing into the surrounding cities because we won’t have enough room in our congregation for all that I am going to pour out. This will be a good problem to have and something I will teach you to steward with character and humility.
Scripture
The Bible isn’t a systematic book about leadership, but there is a lot we can learn if we are able to recognize principles and see how the Lord invites us to lead one another. 

We can see by the life of Jesus and his invitation to the disciples that leadership was an all in sport. 
We can also see by the design of the church - giving 5 different offices without explicit structure to equip the saints - that leadership is both collaborative and requires different skills and perspectives to lead communities well. 
We know by the emphasized relationship with Paul and Timothy that individual leadership had a role and was empowering in nature. 
We can see from Paul that ‘what we do’ is individual, but ‘how we do it’ has a little more focus
“I wish that all men were like me…” 1 Corinthians 7:7 when talking about celibacy - an individual expression. 
“Follow my example, as I follow the example of Christ.” 1 Corinthians 11:1 when talking more generally about following Jesus.
We see that different gifts are expressed by different people. 

And throughout the Old Testament we see an example of following God to be the anchor of any good leadership. While you may achieve for a season with strong conviction, your legacy will fall short very quickly if it is not anchored in following the Lord. 

Courageous Questions

Are you intentionally leading in every sphere of influence you have? 
This doesn’t mean having a title, but can be anything from leading in how you do things, or leading in setting direction, or leading by serving those in authority.
What is your leadership plan for (your family, your work, your community, etc.)
How does your relationship with the Lord influence how you lead others? 
Are you able to separate leading someone to an objective vs leading them to becoming? 
What skills can you develop to better support the leadership mentality that you have? 


My Journey
I have often been recognized as someone with natural charisma and leadership ability, and it’s true that people have been willing to follow me for most of my life. However, it’s been a long road in developing the necessary supporting skills and spiritual maturity to lay the foundations of good leadership throughout my life. I’m continuing to challenge myself and grow as a leader and continue to recognize places the Lord is inviting me to mature. 

I realize that I either stop here, or write 3 - 4 pages on what this looks like. So I can save this for another time 🙂. 

Fruitfulness
The basis of my posture towards this idea comes from two places in scripture, which are really indicative of a larger biblical and Kingdom reality. 

In Mark 11, Jesus sees a fig tree that does not bear fruit and curses it. 
In John 15, in one of the more intimate times recorded with the disciples during Jesus’ life, he explains that His relationship to the Father is what connects our relationship to the Father. The outcome of this connection is fruit, specifically, “much fruit” and “fruit that will last.”

So what is fruit? 
Given that this is probably a topic someone (or many people) wrote a dissertation about, I am humbly expressing my current beliefs about fruitfulness. 

Fruit has to last - and specifically I believe that this means it must last not only beyond our lives, but also beyond earth and into heaven. 
[Money | Leadership | Promotion] by itself, and even the results of it, are not by themselves fruit.
We know many things will not last, but we know that faith, hope, and love will. What we invest in knowing God (faith), believing His goodness is for us (hope), and sharing it with others (love) is eternally fruitful.
We know fruit comes from connection to the Vine, cultivated by the Gardener. If it’s not founded in Jesus, it’s not Kingdom fruit. Giving, for example, can be cultural and rooted in many things, not all of which are eternally fruitful.
Multiplication matters. There are two parables devoted to multiplying resources. It seems like fruitfulness multiplies. 
The Fruits of the Spirit are part of a fruitful soul - love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, gentleness, faithfulness, and self-control. 


Am I fruitful? That’s a question that takes equal parts courage and humility to answer. 
Over the past few years, my garden has been completely overturned and re-planted. My professional success was on a clear upward trajectory in my late 20’s, but my last 5 years have been professionally (and financially) unpredictable and inconsistent. However - 

What has happened in my heart - if I hold to it - will certainly last. Baggage from my childhood, wounds and offenses of all sorts, have been slowly and gently surfaced to allow the Lord to invite me to healing. I’ve said that I forgive people, especially during sermons on forgiveness and reading the sermon on the mount, but the journey of restoring my heart and learning to love people in the places of my pain has taken much longer than I realized was necessary - but it has been so worth it. 
My soul is more prosperous. When I was in college, I wanted people to match my intensity. I didn’t get that it was a personality trait and not a sign of authentic faith. I am currently on a journey of seeing my personality refined and restored, but have also been on a longer journey of appreciating the many different ways humans express ourselves. The main area of fruitfulness from this has been a change in my posture from inviting people to intensity, to inviting people to intimacy. My relationships and my community efforts have focused far more on encouraging and coaching people to build their foundation on knowing God than on anything else. That is the essence of Boat Crew and the men’s ministry. That is the foundation of my mentorship posture. I believe that will last.
My strength - what I put my efforts towards - is much less personality driven, or a consequence to immaturity, and more directed by the Lord. I feel like I am continually looking to humbly learn from someone before I am subjected to my immaturity, but I also want to continue learning from experiences and consequences as they come. I feel generally much more at peace about trusting the Lord with my effort while trying not to settle for being passive. 

I semi-regularly ask myself these kinds of questions when considering how I impact relationships. Do people around me - 
Grow in intimacy with the Lord? 
Have more confidence in hearing the Lord speak to who they are? 
Live more courageously in their lives? (Relationally, professionally, etc.)
Invest intentionally in the most important relationships? (Spouse, children, etc.)


Reflections on Fruitfulness
Growing in Maturity
Yea! This again 🙂

Awareness → Desire → Priority → Consistency & Discipline → Integration

I think there are many perspectives and metrics on fruitfulness that have utility, but they can distract from our heavenly invitation. Overall, there is no valuable measure of fruitfulness except to do the will of the Father. We are invited to know Jesus as intimately as He knows the Father and follow just as wholeheartedly. We can see from the life of Jesus that any attempt to justify fruitfulness another way is foolish.

However, I think in developing maturity, it is important to see many perspectives on fruitfulness and still be able to prioritize them correctly. It is also foolish to not recognize Jesus’s teaching on doubling our ‘talents,’ or getting a 10x return on our ‘mina.’ A baseline of maturity is knowing that doing well in measurable ways is a level of fruitfulness. 

Once someone has found themselves generally fruitful (reproducing), there is a temptation to be justified by fruit - by increase. This temptation can lead to a compromise of our values in order to maintain a level of fruitfulness. Rather than accept tuning, we force continued growth. In the world’s eyes, perhaps we’ve succeeded by some metric, but heaven sees beyond ROI and year over year growth. When our fruitfulness becomes rooted in compromise, we’ve disconnected from the vine and chosen to become our own source. 

We see this in the life of Jesus in the many times he had a crowd of followers and saw them disbursed or downright outraged in a single line of a sermon. 
Reading Isaiah 61 and claiming, “This has been fulfilled in your midst”
“Eat my flesh, drink my blood”

In general, we want to teach our young men to be fruitful and effective in their life. We want to see them succeed and become valuable to the world around them. In doing so, we want to instill in them Kingdom values that aren’t just quotable, but written in their hearts. They will be tested, and those tests will prune their success and forge their character. In abiding, they will bear fruit that lasts forever. In compromise, we pray they are in strong communities that help correct and restore them. 

Our older men need to be well versed in this to lead by example and instruction. 

Inspirational Peoples
In general, I am inspired by three levels of fruitfulness. Each level being more inspiring than the previous - 
Men who are successful. They have leveraged their gifts to produce value and are increasing in value. 
Men who are uncompromising, even at the cost of their success. There is a stubbornness that is worldly, and that is not what I am talking about. It is men who refuse to compromise their value even at the cost of their next growth - men who accept their seasons of pruning from the Lord even when the world is offering ‘more.’
Men who conquer. These men have seen success, walked through seasons of pruning, and the Lord sends them places to conquer. Their identity is forged and their calling is nothing more than following Jesus each and every day - through seasons of battle, through seasons of building, always from rest.  

Scripture
John 15 is where the axioms of this concept reside. 
David is an example of fruitfulness in seasons of conquering.
Solomon is an example of fruitfulness in seasons of building.
The life of Jesus has examples of him building followers and following the Father even when that impacted his ‘metrics’

Courageous Questions
What fruit in your life will last beyond your life? Into eternity? 
When is the last time the Lord pruned you? 
How have you seen the Lord increase your fruitfulness from a season of pruning? 

Trials
Trials wasn’t on the initial list, but something in the process of doing this made me want to include it in my own Standards. I want to start with a few versus - 

Romans 5:3 - 5
but we also glory in our sufferings, because we know that suffering produces perseverance; perseverance, character; and character, hope. And hope does not put us to shame, because God’s love has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us.

James 1: 2 - 4
Consider it pure joy, my brothers and sisters, whenever you face trials of many kinds, because you know that the testing of your faith produces perseverance. Let perseverance finish its work so that you may be mature and complete, not lacking anything.

What I know is that following Jesus includes trials and suffering. What I believe is that the gap between what Jesus and scripture declares as Kingdom, and what is happening on the earth, is a place that can only be traversed in worship - believing God is who He says He is and can do what He says He can do, no matter our current situation.

There are trials and suffering that come from immaturity - natural consequences to poor decisions. But following the Lord wholeheartedly will also lead to the testing of our faith - the building of character that lays a foundation for hope - for heaven to invade earth. 

My early years as a believer were full of significantly more immaturity and natural consequence. I thought I was suffering for my faith, but I think I was suffering more for my lack of wisdom. I still see that from time to time, but I think I am starting to see more trials because of the places the Lord is inviting me rather than just my personal decisions.

I’m learning to consider them joy. I’m learning to appreciate even trials of my past youth in how they corrected me, even if they were things I could have learned by listening to others. My desire is that I would learn joyful perseverance. That I would see from heaven’s perspective rather than fixate on earthly frustrations. That I would worship the Lord with all my might, offering myself as a living sacrifice, a pleasing aroma, as all impurities are burned from within and around me, and only what is most pure - refined by fire - remains.
Reflections on Trials
Growing in Maturity
Consequence - Training - Inheritance
Inspirational Peoples
…
Scripture
…
Courageous Questions
…
Journey


Inheritance
Here’s what I know / believe - The Lord moves through inheritance. What one person does faithfully is meant to bless generations. Throughout biblical history, this was how the Lord spoke to people who faithfully followed his ways. There was a promise that their legacy would be a blessing in their family for generations to come. As I believe that to be true when originating with our faithfulness, I also believe it is true in originating from the Lord - He has an inheritance for His children, each individual child. 

An inheritance is not something you earn, it is something you receive because of who you are. It is directly tied to an understanding of identity. There are a few clear pictures of this in scripture, but the most clear are probably Jesus and Elijah to Elisha.

Jesus, for example, read Isaiah 61 in the synagogue of his home town, Nazareth. That was him declaring his inheritance because he knew with certainty who he was. From 12, he knew he was the Son of God. He faithfully walked that out till he was baptized at 30 and Holy Spirit descended on him as a dove. From there, he began to walk out the inheritance of His identity - Set free the captives, declare good news, etc. 

For me, I think I am still uncovering much of my identity and learning to forge character. I believe one of the most clear verses on this process is found in Romans 5:3 - 5: 

Suffering produces perseverance, perseverance, character, and character, hope. And hope does not put us to shame, because God’s love has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us. 

The only thing that can end in hope is what starts with a word from Jesus - His word never returns void. What we hear Jesus speak to us, our identity, is worth suffering for. It’s worth discomfort for an extended period of time as character is developed. Character is the foundation for hope and hope is a lightning rod for heaven, especially for those who have already been given Holy Spirit. 

I know my inheritance comes from Jesus speaking to who I am and me living that courageously. I am in the process of building character as what the Lord speaks to me becomes more clear. 




Reflections on Inheritance
Growing in Maturity
Awareness → Priority → Discipline → Integration
Inspirational Peoples
…
Scripture
…
Courageous Questions
…
Journey
…

